docs: add leaderboard runnable example (closes #1039) (#1041)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/examples/dapps/leaderboard.mdx

{/* SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
copyright: This file is part of midnight-docs. Copyright (C) Midnight Foundation. Licensed
under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); You may not use this file except in
compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to
in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for
the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License. */}

---
sidebar_label: "Leaderboard DApp"
sidebar_position: 30
title: Leaderboard DApp
description: Learn how the leaderboard DApp demonstrates privacy-preserving score submission and ownership verification with Zero Knowledge proofs on Midnight Network.
toc_max_heading_level: 2

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
copyright: This file is part of midnight-docs. Copyright (C) Midnight Foundation. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); You may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
sidebar_label: "Leaderboard DApp"
sidebar_position: 25
title: Leaderboard DApp
description: Learn how the leaderboard DApp demonstrates privacy-preserving score submission and ownership verification with zero-knowledge proofs on Midnight Network.
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---
```

# Leaderboard DApp

> The leaderboard contract demonstrates privacy-preserving smart contracts on Midnight using the Compact language. This example shows how to create a DApp that lets players submit scores with configurable privacy modes while protecting player identity through Zero Knowledge (ZK) proofs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leaderboard smart contract demonstrates privacy-preserving score tracking on Midnight using the Compact language. This example shows how to create a DApp that lets players submit scores with configurable privacy modes while protecting player identity through zero-knowledge (ZK) proofs.
```

> The leaderboard example is a privacy-focused DApp that introduces key Midnight concepts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leaderboard example introduces key Midnight concepts:
```

- Building a browser-based frontend that connects to the Lace wallet

By the end of this guide, you will understand how the leaderboard contract enforces privacy rules and how to build and interact with the full DApp in your browser.

## The leaderboard scenario

Imagine an arcade leaderboard where players want to record their high scores. The rules are straightforward:

- Anyone can submit a score at any time.
- Each entry stores a score, a display name, and an ownership commitment.
- Players choose how their display name appears: a custom name, their public address, or an anonymous generated name like "Crimson Tiger."
- Only the original submitter can prove ownership of their entry using a ZK proof.

The challenge is enforcing ownership rules while giving players full privacy control. Traditional systems require storing the player's identity on a server. Midnight offers a better approach: players prove ownership locally through ZK proofs without transmitting private data across the network.

## DApp architecture

The leaderboard example uses a monorepo structure with three workspace packages and a Docker configuration for the proof server.

> ```text

Reviewer: For consistency with `bboard.mdx`, which uses bare fenced code blocks (without a language tag) for directory trees and command output, consider removing the `text` language tag here. The same applies to the compiler output block further down (line 176).

  return persistentHash<Vector<3, Bytes<32>>>([pad(32, "leaderboard:owner:"), sk, sk]);
}

export circuit submitScore(
  score: Uint<64>,
  useCustomName: Boolean
): [] {
  const sk = localSecretKey();
  const ownerHash = ownerCommitment(sk);
  nextId.increment(1);
  const entryId = disclose(nextId.read() as Uint<64>);
  if (disclose(useCustomName)) {
    const customName = getCustomName();
    scores.insert(entryId, ScoreEntry {
      score: disclose(score),
      displayName: disclose(customName),
      ownerHash: disclose(ownerHash)
    });
  } else {
    scores.insert(entryId, ScoreEntry {
      score: disclose(score),
      displayName: disclose(persistentHash<Bytes<32>>(sk)),
      ownerHash: disclose(ownerHash)
    });
  }
}

export circuit verifyOwnership(targetEntryId: Uint<64>): [] {
  assert(scores.member(disclose(targetEntryId)), "entry not found");
  const entry = scores.lookup(disclose(targetEntryId));
  const callerHash = ownerCommitment(localSecretKey());
  assert(callerHash == entry.ownerHash, "not the owner");
}
```

The contract consists of three main components.

### Ledger state

Two public fields track the leaderboard state on-chain:

> - `scores`: A `Map<Uint<64>, ScoreEntry>` that stores all submitted entries, keyed by an auto-incrementing ID. Each `ScoreEntry` holds a score, a display name, and an ownership commitment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ownerCommitment(sk)`: A helper circuit that derives an on-chain identity from your secret key using `persistentHash`. It produces a deterministic commitment that you can store and verify later without revealing the secret.
```

> - `nextId`: A `Counter` that auto-increments to assign a unique ID to each new entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `submitScore(score, useCustomName)`: Creates a new leaderboard entry. It retrieves your secret key via the `localSecretKey` witness, computes the owner commitment, and inserts a new `ScoreEntry` into `scores`. The `useCustomName` flag controls whether the display name comes from the `getCustomName` witness or derives directly from the secret key hash.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `verifyOwnership(targetEntryId)`: Lets you prove you own a specific entry. It looks up the entry, recomputes the owner commitment from your secret key, and asserts that it matches the stored `ownerHash`. Nothing is written to the ledger.
```

### Circuits

Three exported circuits define the contract's operations:

- `ownerCommitment(sk)`: A helper circuit that derives an on-chain identity from the user's secret key using `persistentHash`. It produces a deterministic commitment that can be stored and verified later without revealing the secret.

> - `submitScore(score, useCustomName)`: Creates a new leaderboard entry. It retrieves the user's secret key via the `localSecretKey` witness, computes the owner commitment, and inserts a new `ScoreEntry` into `scores`. The `useCustomName` flag controls whether the display name comes from the `getCustomName` witness or is derived directly from the secret key hash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `localSecretKey()`: Returns your secret key from private state. The key never appears on-chain or in any generated proof.
```

> - `verifyOwnership(targetEntryId)`: Lets a user prove they own a specific entry. It looks up the entry, recomputes the owner commitment from the caller's secret key, and asserts that it matches the stored `ownerHash`. Nothing is written to the ledger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getCustomName()`: Returns a custom display name that the TypeScript host provides at runtime. The TypeScript layer decides what value to supply based on your selected privacy mode.
```

### Witnesses

The contract defines two witness functions:

- `localSecretKey()`: Returns the user's secret key from private state. The key never appears on-chain or in any generated proof.
- `getCustomName()`: Returns a custom display name provided by the TypeScript host at runtime. The TypeScript layer decides what value to supply based on the user's selected privacy mode.

## Prerequisites

Before working with the leaderboard example, ensure that you have:

- Node.js version 22 or higher
- Docker Desktop installed and running
- Compact toolchain version 0.31.0 installed
- Lace wallet browser extension installed

For more information, refer to [install the toolchain](../../getting-started/installation).

> 

Reviewer: This page would benefit from two additional sections before "Compile the contract" to match the structure of the existing [bboard.mdx](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/midnight-docs/blob/main/docs/examples/dapps/bboard.mdx) example page:

**1. "Set up the example" section** with:
- A note that no standalone `example-leaderboard` repository exists yet, directing readers to the tutorial
- An "Install dependencies" subsection with `npm install` from the project root

**2. "Start the proof server" section** with:
- The Docker command: `docker run -p 6300:6300 midnightntwrk/proof-server:8.0.3 -- midnight-proof-server -v`
- A `:::tip[Keep the proof server running]` admonition

These sections are present in `bboard.mdx` and are essential for a "runnable example" page -- without them, readers have no way to obtain the code or start the proof server before compiling.

## Compile the contract

> Open a new terminal window and navigate to your project directory. Navigate to the `contract` directory and compile the contract:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a new terminal window at the project root and navigate to the `contract` directory:
```

```bash
cd contract
npm run compact
```

> 

Reviewer: There is an extra blank line here (two consecutive blank lines). One blank line between the code block and the following paragraph is sufficient.

This command compiles the contract and generates TypeScript bindings, circuit keys, and ZKIR files in `contract/managed/leaderboard/`.

You should see the following output:

```text
Compiling 2 circuits:
  circuit "submitScore" (k=13, rows=4720)
  circuit "verifyOwnership" (k=13, rows=2352)
```

Build the contract and API packages:

```bash
cd ..
npm run build
```

> ## Wallet setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up the wallet
```

The browser DApp connects to the Lace wallet for on-chain transactions.

1. Install the [Lace](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/lace/gafhhkghbfjjkeiendhlofajokpaflmk) browser extension and create a new wallet.
2. Set the network to **Preprod**.
3. Set the proof server to `http://localhost:6300`.
4. Fund your wallet with tNIGHT from the [Preprod faucet](https://midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev/).
5. Go to Tokens, click **Generate tDUST**, and confirm the transaction.

:::note
tDUST is required to pay transaction fees on Preprod. It is generated from your tNIGHT balance.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note[About tDUST]
You need tDUST to pay transaction fees on Preprod. The wallet generates tDUST from your tNIGHT balance.
:::
```

## Run the browser DApp

> Navigate to the `leaderboard-ui` directory and start the development server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the `leaderboard-ui` directory, install dependencies, and start the development server:
```

> ```bash
> cd leaderboard-ui
> npm run dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cd leaderboard-ui
npm install
npm run dev
```

```

Open your browser at `http://localhost:3000`. The leaderboard UI loads and connects to the Preprod indexer.

## Interact with the leaderboard

### Connect your wallet

Click **Connect Wallet** in the top-right corner of the UI. Lace prompts you to authorize the connection. After you approve, your wallet address and tDUST balance appear in the header.

### Deploy a new contract

Click **Deploy Contract**. The UI calls `LeaderboardAPI.deployContract()`, which submits a deployment transaction through Lace. Wait for the transaction to confirm on Preprod. This typically takes 20 to 30 seconds. After confirmation, the contract address appears in the UI.

:::note
Contract deployment requires tDUST for transaction fees.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note[Transaction time]
Contract deployment typically takes 20 to 30 seconds on Preprod as the network processes your transaction and ZK proofs.
:::
```

### Submit a score

> The game area displays a simple score counter. Play the game or enter a score manually, then choose a display name mode before submitting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The game area displays a score counter. Play the game or enter a score manually, then choose a display name mode before submitting:
```

- **Custom name**: Enter a name up to 32 characters. The `getCustomName` witness supplies this value to the circuit.

> - **Public address**: Your wallet address is passed as the display name via the `getCustomName` witness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Public address**: The `getCustomName` witness passes your wallet address as the display name.
```

> - **Anonymous**: No custom name witness is invoked. The circuit stores `persistentHash(secretKey)` as the display name. The UI renders this as a generated name like "Crimson Tiger."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Anonymous**: The contract does not invoke the `getCustomName` witness. Instead, the circuit stores `persistentHash(secretKey)` as the display name. The `localSecretKey` witness is still called to compute the owner commitment. The UI renders anonymous entries as generated names like "Crimson Tiger."
```

Click **Submit Score**. The UI:

1. Retrieves your secret key from private state via the `localSecretKey` witness.
2. Computes your owner commitment using `ownerCommitment(secretKey)`.
3. Generates a ZK proof locally via the proof server.
4. Submits the transaction through Lace.
5. Waits for confirmation and refreshes the leaderboard.

:::info
Your secret key never leaves your machine. The proof server generates the ZK proof locally before anything is sent to the network.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info[Privacy protection]
Your secret key never leaves your machine. The proof server generates the ZK proof locally before anything is sent to the network.
:::
```

### View the leaderboard

The leaderboard table updates automatically after each confirmed transaction. It reads state directly from the Preprod indexer without requiring a wallet connection. Anonymous entries appear with generated names. Custom and public-address entries appear as submitted.

### Verify entry ownership

Click **Verify Ownership** next to any of your entries. The UI calls `verifyOwnership(entryId)`, which generates a ZK proof that your secret key matches the `ownerHash` stored in the entry. The circuit asserts the match on-chain without writing anything to the ledger.

> A success message confirms ownership. If your wallet does not hold the correct secret key for that entry, the assertion fails and the transaction is rejected locally before reaching the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A success message confirms ownership. If your wallet does not hold the correct secret key for that entry, the assertion fails and the proof server rejects the transaction locally before it reaches the network.
```

:::caution
Ownership verification only works from the same browser and wallet instance that submitted the entry, because the secret key lives in the local private state store.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::caution[Same browser required]
Ownership verification only works from the same browser and wallet instance that submitted the entry, because the secret key lives in the local private state store.
:::
```

- `verifyOwnership(targetEntryId)`: Lets a user prove they own a specific entry. It looks up the entry, recomputes the owner commitment from the caller's secret key, and asserts that it matches the stored `ownerHash`. Nothing is written to the ledger.

### Witnesses

The contract defines two witness functions:

- `localSecretKey()`: Returns the user's secret key from private state. The key never appears on-chain or in any generated proof.
- `getCustomName()`: Returns a custom display name provided by the TypeScript host at runtime. The TypeScript layer decides what value to supply based on the user's selected privacy mode.

## Prerequisites

Before working with the leaderboard example, ensure that you have:

- Node.js version 22 or higher
- Docker Desktop installed and running
- Compact toolchain version 0.31.0 installed
- Lace wallet browser extension installed

For more information, refer to [install the toolchain](../../getting-started/installation).

## Compile the contract

Open a new terminal window and navigate to your project directory. Navigate to the `contract` directory and compile the contract:

```bash
cd contract
npm run compact
```

> The `npm run compact` script runs the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> compact compile leaderboard.compact managed/leaderboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- `verifyOwnership(targetEntryId)`: Lets a user prove they own a specific entry. It looks up the entry, recomputes the owner commitment from the caller's secret key, and asserts that it matches the stored `ownerHash`. Nothing is written to the ledger.

### Witnesses

The contract defines two witness functions:

- `localSecretKey()`: Returns the user's secret key from private state. The key never appears on-chain or in any generated proof.
- `getCustomName()`: Returns a custom display name provided by the TypeScript host at runtime. The TypeScript layer decides what value to supply based on the user's selected privacy mode.

## Prerequisites

Before working with the leaderboard example, ensure that you have:

- Node.js version 22 or higher
- Docker Desktop installed and running
- Compact toolchain version 0.31.0 installed
- Lace wallet browser extension installed

> - Command-line familiarity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

For more information, refer to [install the toolchain](../../getting-started/installation).

> ## Compatibility

Reviewer 2: This should be either dynamically loaded from the package.json file or not included here at all. My preference would be to not include the specific versions here. These will change semi-regularly

This example targets the following versions from the [compatibility matrix](../../relnotes/support-matrix).

| Component | Version |
|-----------|---------|
| Compact compiler | 0.31.0 |
| Compact runtime | 0.16.0 |
| Ledger | 8.0.3 |
| midnight-js | 4.0.4 |
| DApp connector API | 4.0.1 |
| Proof server | 8.0.3 |

## Set up the example

Clone the leaderboard repository and install dependencies:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/midnightntwrk/midnight-leaderboard.git
cd midnight-leaderboard
npm install
```

If you prefer to build the project from scratch, follow the complete [Leaderboard tutorial](../../tutorials/leaderboard/overview).

## Start the proof server

> The proof server generates ZK proofs for transactions locally to protect private data. It must be running before you can compile or interact with contracts.

Reviewer 2: You don't need the proof server to compile contracts. It needs to be running before processing transactions

  circuit "verifyOwnership" (k=13, rows=2352)
```

Build the contract and API packages:

```bash
cd ..
npm run build
```

## Wallet setup

The browser DApp connects to the Lace wallet for on-chain transactions.

1. Install the [Lace](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/lace/gafhhkghbfjjkeiendhlofajokpaflmk) browser extension and create a new wallet.
2. Set the network to **Preprod**.
3. Set the proof server to `http://localhost:6300`.
4. Fund your wallet with tNIGHT from the [Preprod faucet](https://midnight-tmnight-preprod.nethermind.dev/).
5. Go to Tokens, click **Generate tDUST**, and confirm the transaction.

:::note
tDUST is required to pay transaction fees on Preprod. It is generated from your tNIGHT balance.
:::

## Run the browser DApp

Navigate to the `leaderboard-ui` directory and start the development server:

```bash
cd leaderboard-ui
npm run dev
```

The `dev` script copies the compiled circuit keys and ZKIR files into `public/` before starting Vite:

```bash
mkdir -p ./public/keys ./public/zkir &&
  cp -r ../contract/managed/leaderboard/keys/* ./public/keys/ &&
  cp -r ../contract/managed/leaderboard/zkir/* ./public/zkir/ &&
  vite

> ```

Reviewer 2: No need to include the script command in-line here. It already runs with `npm run dev` -- if you include the actual script commands in a code block here devs think they need to run this too
